# B - Fundamentals of Web apps

- <https://fullstackopen.com/en/part0/fundamentals_of_web_apps>

## HTTP GET

- HTTP: Hypertext Transfer Protocol
- HTTP is a protocol used for communication between web browsers and web servers.
- HTTP GET is a method used by web browsers to request data from a server.

## Traditional web applications

- All of the data shown on the page was fetched with the HTML code generated by the server, and the browser only renders the HTML as instructed.

## Running application logic in the browser

- JavaScript is a programming language that runs in the browser.
- JavaScript code can manipulate the HTML elements on the page using the Document Object Model (DOM) API.

## Event handlers and Callback functions

- Event handlers are functions that are called when a specific event occurs, such as a button click or a form submission.

## Document Object Model or DOM

Document Object Model, or DOM, is an Application Programming Interface (API) that enables programmatic modification of the element trees corresponding to web pages.

## Manipulating the document object from console

- `document` is The topmost node of the DOM tree
- At the Console tab, type `document`. The entire HTML document is printed out.
- To add a new element, type:

```js
list = document.getElementsByTagName("ul")[0];
newElement = document.createElement("li");
newElement.textContent = "Page manipulation from console is easy";
list.appendChild(newElement);
```

## CSS

- CSS: Cascading Style Sheets
- CSS is used to style HTML elements
- CSS rules consist of a selector and a declaration block
- CSS Classes as attributes in HTML elements

```css
.container {
  padding: 10px;
  border: 1px solid;
}
```

```html
<div class="container">This div is styled using CSS class "container"</div>
```

## Forms and HTTP POST

```html
<form action="/exampleapp/new_note" method="POST">
  <input type="text" name="note" /><br />
  <input type="submit" value="Save" />
</form>
```

- `method`: defines the HTTP method to be used when submitting the form. In this case, it is `POST`.
- `action`: defines the URL where the form data will be sent. In this case, it is `/exampleapp/new_note`.

Submitting above form sends an HTTP `POST` request to `/exampleapp/new_note`.
The server responds with:

- Status Code: `302 Found`
- Location: `/exampleapp/notes`

The HTTP `302 Found` redirection response status code indicates that the requested resource has been temporarily moved to the URL in the Location header ([MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Reference/Status/302)).

It will force the browser to perform a new HTTP GET request to the address defined in the header's Location.

The code on the server is:

```js
app.post("/new_note", (req, res) => {
  notes.push({
    content: req.body.note,
    date: new Date(),
  });
  return res.redirect("/notes");
});
```

The `res.redirect('/notes')` part is responsible for sending the `302 Found` response to the browser.

## AJAX

- AJAX: Asynchronous JavaScript and XML
- Is was the crest of the wave of early 2000s web technology. The new generation has not even heard of it.
- Enabled the fetching of content to web pages using JavaScript included within the HTML, without the need to rerender the page.

## Single Page Application

- SPA: Single Page Application
- An application that runs in the browser and dynamically updates the content without reloading the page.
- SPA-style websites don't fetch all of their pages separately from the server. Instead, they load the necessary HTML, JavaScript, and CSS files once at the beginning, and then dynamically update the content as needed using JavaScript.
- Below, note that the form does not have `action` or `method` attributes:

```html
<form id="notes_form">
  <input type="text" name="note" /><br />
  <input type="submit" value="Save" />
</form>
```

Sending the form data is handled by JavaScript code, we get the following response from the server:

- Status Code: `201 Created`
- Content-Type: `application/json; charset=utf-8`

## JavaScript-libraries

- jQuery
  - Cross-browser compatible JS functions to manipulate the DOM and do AJAX requests.
  - Nowadays is not as justified. Most popular browsers support basic JS functionalities well.
- Angular
  - SPA Framework
  - 2012: launched by Google
  - 2014: Angular 2 released, a complete rewrite of AngularJS
- React
  - SPA Framework/library developed by Facebook
  - Focuses on building UI components
- VueJS
  - SPA Framework
  - Created by former Google employee Evan You
  - Newcomer, gaining popularity

## Full-stack web development

- Web apps have two main layers:
  - 1) the browser (frontend), closer to the end-user
  - 2) the server (backend), where the database resides
- Javascript can be used in both frontend and backend development.
- Full-stack developers must also have enough configuration and administration skills to operate their applications, for example, in the cloud.

## JavaScript fatigue

- It is challenging to keep up with the rapid changes in the JavaScript ecosystem.

## 0.1: HTML

Review the basics of HTML by reading this tutorial from Mozilla: [HTML tutorial](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/HTML_basics).

This exercise is not submitted to GitHub, it's enough to just read the tutorial.

## 0.2: CSS

Review the basics of CSS by reading this tutorial from Mozilla: [CSS tutorial](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/CSS_basics).

This exercise is not submitted to GitHub, it's enough to just read the tutorial.

## 0.3: HTML forms

Learn about the basics of HTML forms by reading Mozilla's tutorial [Your first form](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Forms/Your_first_HTML_form).

This exercise is not submitted to GitHub, it's enough to just read the tutorial.
